 
−iauliai University Lithuania  Abstract  The value of research and the career of
 a university lecturer depend heavily on the success in publishing scientific papers
. This article reviews the guidelines for 
writing and submitting research papers. The three most important success criteria in 
publishing are as follows: the paper describes a good research it is written according to the traditions of scientific writing and submitted to the right journal. It 
is effectual to follow the usual structure of scientific papers: introduction methods results 
discussion and conclusion. The 
reviews are free support and advice in doing research and writing papers. There are different types of papers:  a) b) c) d) e) the reports of empirical studies 
the description and analysis of a case study the review articles which include me
ta-analysis of previous research  the theoretical articles to develop theory and 
the methodological articles to develop research methods (Publication 

manual – 2003). These papers put the scientific discussion in the field forward (Day 2006). Reviewing of your manuscript gives 
you invaluable information about the res
earch in your field and about writing research papers. 1. Good research is 
rigorous systematic and very focuse
d (Day 2006). 2. Papers on popular topics (gender collectivism narcotics etc.) 3. You have been reading the best papers in your research field and you give an 

overview of the contemporary trends in th
e field. 4. The most thorough presentation of these 
traditions is published by the American 
Psychological Association (Publication 
manual – 2003). Papers are not badly written and/or the described research is not of low quality but the papers do not suit the objectives of the j
ournal. Journals™ web sites usually give the following 

information:  
a) b) c) d) editors indexing in databases forthcoming thematic issues 
aims and the content of the journal 
recommended style of writing 
copyright issues of the papers 
e) f) g) appropriate length of papers requirements to headings figures references etc. Indexing of the papers of a journal in scientific databases is an indicator of the 
quality of the journal. The other indicators 
are high frequency of citing of the papers in other journals well known editors a
nd editorial board members low acceptance 
rate etc. The most prestigious is the ISI (Institute
 for Scientific Information) Web of 
Knowledge (Current Content). Every branch of science has its own database for example the SSCI (Social 
Science Citation Index) in social scie
nces the ERIC (Edu
cational Resource 
Information Center) the International ERIC 
and the BEI (British Education Index) in education PsycARTICLES and PsycINFO 
in psychology etc. The acceptance rate of journals 
is very different; it varies from one percent to eighty 
percents (Henson 1999). Kenneth T. Henson (1999 780) recommends 

young researches not to send their manuscripts to the journals with the acceptance 

rate below 25%. After the 
thematic issue is published the editors tend to reject the manuscripts on this topic 

(Henson 1999). Some journals value practical 

implications of the research the others va
lue the originality of 
findings and approach the others emphasize high clarity and readability of presentation still other editors base their decisions mainly on the rigor 
of the research methodology etc (Day 2006). It is easier to publish papers which correspond to the world-view of the editor and reviewers (Toomela 2003). Really new knowledge is easier to publish in periphery; it can be published in 
the leading journals only if there are two competing scientific schools (Toomela 
2003). If you are not sure in the selection 
of the journal you can send the abstract of your paper to the editor and ask if this paper might be of interest for the j
ournal (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005; Murray 2005 63 - 64). Writing the abstract and introduction  Robert Hauptman (2005 115) writes: ﬁPerha
ps the single most important point is 
to have the desire to discover something new 
and share it with readershipﬂ. It is time 
to begin the writing of a paper when you have
 something to say to your colleagues in 
the scientific world (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). It is always eas
ier to write in co-operation the quality of 
the paper will be higher and you learn something from your co-authors (Hauptman 

2005; Murray 2005). The structure is as follows: 
a) abstract  b) introduction 
c) methods 
d) results  e) discussion f) conclusion g) references 
h) appendixes. It is useful to start the writing fr
om an outline of the paper (Lester 1990; 
Neman 1989). Waste 
words (study on a the–) should be excluded and verbs are not used. It usually includes the 
following information:  
a) purpose of the paper b) methodology of the research: subjec
ts instruments procedure 
c) findings and conclusion d) the value of the paper. It is useful to begin fr
om a recent meta-analysis if available to 
consider the latest publications in the area and especially in the journal to which you 

intend to submit your paper. The editors 
and authors of the journal can be the reviewers of the manuscript (Fradkov 2003). It empha
sizes the pertinent findings 
and possibly relevant methodological 
issues (Publication manual – 2003). At he end of the introduction there is sometimes a short description of the 
rationale of the investigation described in the paper (Publication manual– 2003 17). Writing the methods and the results section  The next important part of a scientific 
paper is the methods part. If the paper describes a continuation of an earlier study and the method has 
been soon published in detail you may refer th
e reader to your earlier paper and give 
a brief summary of the method (Publicatio
n Manual – 2003 17). On the 

other side too brief and vague methods description may cause the rejection of the 

manuscript (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005 16). Describe in detail the basis and the com
position of your own questionnaire or test 
(including the number and the type of questions). In the text there is an instruction: ﬁInsert 

Table 1 here!ﬂ The methods of statistical analysis of
 the data essentially belong to the methods part however the stat
istical methods are usually gi
ven in the results part. Mean effects and differences 
are supplied with statistical significance (p valu
e) (Publication manual ... 2003 21 - 
22). It explains how the results 
approve or disapprove your hypothesis (the disapproved hypothesis must have solid 
bases in the introduction part of your paper). You are not allowed to introduce new data in the discussion part (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). Many discussion sections are too long and verbose (Tirri 2002). You should 
follow the journal™s rules for forming the references which in many cases are the 

same as in the Publication manual of th
e APA (2003). A poor reference list is a good justification for the rejection of a 
manuscript (Fradkov 2003 1647). Expressions of surprise exclamations apol
ogies etc should be kept to the minimum 
in the text (Põldsaar & Türk 1999). Comprehensib
le writing is important to the reviewers 
as well (Samuels 1991). There are many rules for clear writing (Mikk 2000 157 Œ 198). 1. 2. 3. 4. Klingner Scanlon and Pressley (2005) recommend 
avoiding the passive voice. Words are in the text not to impress readers but to express your 

concept (Day 2006). You should avoid sexist words: (mankind he chairmen etc.) Põldsaar and 
Türk (1999) differentiate two types of plagiarism: 
1) taking someone™s text table or 
picture without indicating the source 2) ﬁdocumenting the source but paraphrasi
ng its language too closely that is  
lifting whole phrases from the original or using the original™s sentence 
structureﬂ
 (Põldsaar & Türk 1999 22). The scholars usually are ready to help young researches (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). It is very good if you can have a writing coach 

who will help you in writing 
(Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). – 
- Is each figure labeled with the correct
 figure number and a short article 

title?ﬂ 
If the journal is using blind reviewing then you should remove all the information 
that might reveal your identity from th
e text (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). The usual composition of a manuscript for submitting is as follows (Tirri 
2002): - The first numbered page is for the ti
tle the authors™ names and addresses. Copyright consists of moral 
rights (to make changes in text etc.) In 

the agreement the authors warrant that: 
- the article is their original work 

- they have written permission to use a
ny table illustration text that has 
been published earlier - the article has not been assigned or licensed by them to any third party. This is not against the law if publishing in the native 

language fits one of the following cases:  there was a license for pub
lishing the paper only once there was a license for publishing 
the paper during certain time  
there was a license for publishing the paper only in the native language  there was no agreement for the tr
ansfer of copyright (Pisuke 2004). International journals usually ask the author to transfer the copyright and after that it is not possible to publish the same paper in the 
native language without including the right in the agreem
ent with the international 
journal or fitting the agreement to 
one of the three first cases above. The editor will send your manuscript to (anonymous) 
reviewers. It can be sent to editorial board members or to the author you refer to in 
your reference list (Fradkov 2003 1644). They will have one to six months for 
reviewing (Henson 1999). The reviewers are mostly engaged with th
e content of the research described not as much with the writing of the paper. Do not disbelieve everything an editor saysﬂ (Hauptman 2005 118). The conclusion depends heavily on the significance of your problem and your contribution to its solution (Fradkov 2003). We have to keep in 
mind that many published papers have been
 rejected somewhere before publishing 
(Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). Possible conclusion of the editor and the author™s actions  Editor™s 
decision Comments 
Author™s actions Accept as it is Almost never happens 
after the first submission 
Wait for proofs and sign the agree-
ment for the transfer of copyright  
Needs minor 
changes Happens after the second 
or third submission 
Make the recommended changes and 
resubmit 
Revise and 
resubmit 
Usual decision after the 
first submission 
Make the acceptable changes and 

resubmit 
Reject Often the result of 
choosing a wrong journal Make the important changes and 

submit to another journal 
  It really is a compliment to receive the editor™s decision: ﬁrevise and resubmitﬂ. Respond to the editor at once and agree to rework your paper by the date given (Day 2006; Murray 2005). Submit the revised paper and the letter 
of explanations which describes the 
changes you have made and explains 
why some suggested changes were not 
acceptable (Klingner Scanlon & Pressley 2005). The editor can send your paper to 

the same reviewers or new ones and you will 
receive new reviews together with the editor™s conclusion which usually is more
 favorable. Publishing can take from one month to two years (Henson 
1999). The only exception is the changes 

that contradict your important ideas (Day 
2006). I have been analyzing the research met
hods in published papers together with my doctoral students in education and we have found shortcomings in them 
sometimes serious. 2005. Journal of  Scholarly Publishing 36 (2) 115 Œ 119. 2005. Writing Research Papers. Writing Research Papers. 2003. 2003.